
1. On p. 87, Heidegger claims that when we “find ourselves stationed in the midst of beings” those beings “are unveiled somehow as a whole.” Heidegger then goes on to give a few examples of experiences when we experience this, i.e. beings unveiling themselves as a whole. What are these three experiences or moods?

Though Heidegger claims that “we can never comprehend absolutely the whole of beings in themselves” (87) we nonetheless encounter them revealing themselves in our every day experiences: in fact, he says, it “happens all the time in our Daesin.” (87) He points to three moods where this occurs.

Heidegger  suggests  “authentic boredom” — “profound boredom, drifting here and there in the abysses of our existence like a muffling fog, removes all things and humans beings and oneself along with them into a remarkable indifference” (87) thus “manifesting itself as a whole.” (87)  In other words, it is through boredom that we become faced with ourselves and our existence as a whole: in our state of busyness, our minds are preoccupied primary with that which it outside of them: as I’m writing this answer, I’m thinking about Heidegger and the impending deadline for submitting it; I’m not the least bit concerned with my being as a being (though maybe I should be!) 

The second possibility Heidegger points to is the “joy in the presences of the Dasein — and not simply the person — of a human being who we love,” for, Heidegger argues, it is that presence which reveals the wholeness of the other being to me. 

The third mood Heidegger points to — and the one he spends the most time dissecting — is the mood of anxiety. It is anxiety, Heidegger argues, that is “which man is brought before the nothing itself,” though “rarely enough and only for a moment.” Heidegger makes a special note to suggest that he is not referring to “quite common anxiousness, ultimately reducible to fearfulness, which all too readily comes over us” — suggesting that when we feel anxious (like I often do when struggling to complete homework assignments in a timely fashion) we are rather simply fearful: it is anxiety in the face of one thing or another (such as receiving an inferior grade for a class.) Instead, he suggests that the anxiety he is concerned about is the kind of anxiety that is “not in the face of this thing or that thing.” Anxiety is what happens when one is met with the “essential impossibility of determining” the source of the fear that would normally ground every day anxiety: this is a sign, for Heidegger, it is this kind of “anxiety which makes manifest the nothing.”  In other words: it is through anxiety where nothing reveals itself to us a whole.

2. What is transcendence for Heidegger?

Transcendence, for Heidegger is simply the process of overcoming the anxiety and holding oneself “out into the nothing” — a process of “surpassing of beings as a whole.” In other words, for Heidegger, we need to think past the anxiety in the face of nothingness to think towards the question of what it means to _be_ anything at all.

In our every day lives, we are a “lieutenant of the nothings… so finite we cannot even bring ourselves originally before the nothing through our own decision and will.” It is through transcendence that we break the changes: and it through transcendence that we can inquire towards metaphysics: “inquiry beyond or never beings that aims to recover them as such and as a whole for our grasp.” 

3. Heidegger writes that “Dasein can comport itself toward being only if it holds itself out into the nothing” (p. 96). Explain just what this means.

Science, for Heidegger, begins with the assuming and even positing of existence itself: “it would like to dismiss the nothing with a lordly wave of the hand,” (95) it “does not surrender the nothing.” But nothingness is one of Heidegger’s fundamental problems: for, he suggests, it is “from the nothing all beings as beings come to be.”

Thus, the process of transcendence as outlined is the work of simply doing metaphysics, for it is through that process that our beings as beings — or Dasein — can look towards being. Heidegger argues that we need to “go beyond beings” which can only occur in the presence of ourselves as beings: “only because we can question and ground things is the destiny of our existence placed in the hands of the research.” For Heidegger, essentially, doing metaphysics is doing the work of existentialism: first we must consider ourselves beings as such: “philosophy gets under way only by a peculiar insertion of our own existence into the fundamental possibilities of Dasein as a whole” — “only because the nothing is manifest in the ground of Dasein can the total strangeness of beings overwhelm us.”  

This is why science itself cannot give us a metaphysics: and, in fact, doing metaphysics belongs to “nature of the human being” — it is not, for Heidegger, “a division of academic philosophy nor a field of arbitrary notions” — it is “the fundamental occurrence in our Daesin:” in other works, doing the fundamental and relatively commonplace of considering personally our own being as being is really doing the work of metaphysics, and, as such “philosophy can never be measured by the standard of the idea of science… no amount of scientific rigor attains to the seriousness of metaphysics.” 

4. Heidegger tells us that thinking is “ambivalent.” What does that mean?

“Every attempt to follow this train of thought of the lecture will therefore meet with obstacles… that is good” notes Heiddger, after suggesting that “questioning [about metaphysics]() remains ambivalent in an essential sense.” By this, of course, he means that doing the work of metaphysics requires doing two fairly contradictory things at the same time: “think metaphysically” while at the same time  think out the ground of metaphysics, i.e. in a manner that is no longer metaphysics.” 

By this he means that attempting to ground a notion of metaphysics itself requires grounding a notion of metaphysics, but that notion, if it was to properly do its job grounding metaphysics, cannot come from within metaphysics. “Being is not a product of thinking,” but “essential thinking is presumably an event proper to being.” Does this mean that metaphysical thinking “already stands within the law of its truth?” After all, “exact thinking is never the most rigorous thinking… it merely binds itself to the calculation of beings and serves this end exclusively.” It order to properly do a metaphysics, something more than science or logic is necessary to “go beyond beings” and hold oneself “out into the nothing” and “attune the essence of the human being to a thinking whose truth no ‘logic’ is capable of grasping.” In other words, thinking is ambivalent because thinking requires thinking, a process which is grounded on human experience and structures, which may be inadequate to do a proper metaphysics. 

5. How are poetry and philosophy alike? How are they different? Explain this similarity and difference.


For Heidegger, poets and thinkers “dwell near one another on mountains most separate;” the thinker says being… the poet names the holy,” note Heidegger. Both philosophy and poetry grasp towards metaphysics - grasp towards being - but they do so in very different ways. Poetry allows the “language of the historical human” to “spring from the word” and “ring true.” Both kinds of thinking derive from a “long-protected speechlessness and from the careful clarifying of the realm thus cleared.” Poetry, for Heidegger, seems to be one of the ways human thought is able to get around the aforementioned problems of logic and reach out into the nothingness that grounds his system of metaphysics.

In other words, both do absolutely careful consider the nature of truth and being: both come out of a sense of contemplation and considering, working to put that kind of thought which is difficult or impossible to properly transcribe into writing, “they are most purely alike in their care of the word.” But poetry allows for use to “hark back to the concealed history of… people and preserve their entry into the unknown truth of being,” whereas the essence of metaphysics arises “out of the essence of being” and must work to ground that concept of being. Essentially, Heidegger is arguing, thought arises out of  ahistorical notions of being while poetry arises out of a historically-grounded concept of nothingness.

6. Heidegger tells us here that, since the Greeks, metaphysical thinking has identified ‘being’ with ‘presence.’ What precisely does this mean? And how, according to Heidegger, is the way of being of the human being different, according to Heidegger, from the way of being of rocks, trees, horses, angels, and God? (Explain the way of being of the human in some detail and indicate the technical terms Heidegger employs to describe it.)

Heidegger’s metaphysics here starts from the idea that metaphysics . By this, precisely, he means that since the Greeks, metaphysics “operates with a a prior representation of being;” one that “speaks of Being necessarily and hence continually.” (280) In other words: the Greeks started with the idea that everything that is within presence necessarily has the attribute of being, and, importantly, anything that is not within presence simply isn’t accounted for. Before Heidegger, to be is to exist, and to exist is to be. Nothing more, nothing less.

Heidegger questions this claim: suggesting that, actually, “the being that exists is the human being… the human being alone exists.” The human being is different from rocks, trees, horses, angels, and God, because, as Heidegger suggests, the “human being is the that being whose Being is distinguished by an open standing that stands in the unconcealedness of Being, proceeding from Being, in Being.” In other words, Heidegger is arguing that is only the human being who can question what it means to exist at all, or what it means to exist in the first place. Moreover, these traditional notions of conflating being with essence didn’t seem to even give an account for such things such as time: something which is “of an altogether other essence” but which is critical and fundamental to the process of objects “revealing” themselves to us: “in presence there prevails, in an unthought and concealed manner, presence and ration — the prevails time…. Being as such is thus unconcealed in terms of time.” To the Greeks, it is time which does the work of revealing things to us as beings, something which doesn’t have nearly the same metaphysical grounds — substance — as any yet something which is ontologically critical to that project. 

Human beings seem to relate to their own Beingness on different grounds; they have consciousness, which, for Heidegger, is that which names the “existential essence of that which is insofar as it exists.” (285)  To be a self requires both existence and consciousness, but, prior to Heidegger, he argues, it did not provide a framework for understanding this consciousness; positioning the metaphysical inquirer as merely as substantive as any other being and rejecting any notions of non-substance or non-being. Human beings, for Heidegger, have a sense of “openness of Being;” a “there of Being,” a “Dasein:” a term which “names that which is first of all to be experienced, and subsequently thought accordingly, asa a place, namely, as the locality of the Truth of Being.” Our essence, for Heidegger, lies not as unconcealed through time, or any other mechanism, but in our fundamental _existence._ It is a part of our experience that names things as beings. Heidegger argues this to point out that the “ecstatic existential essence of the human being must lead through the metaphysical determination of human selfhood.” Yet “the question concerning existence… is always subservient to the singular question of thought.” This gives Heidegger the ground to go about dissecting human thought itself, and, more importantly, to question “why are there being at all, and not rather Nothing?” 

