This semester, I studied the works of the metaphysicians Plotinus, Rene Descartes, and Martin Heidegger. Each of them has a unique grasp on the question of “what it means to _be_ anything at all, that was nonetheless built upon the foundations of the “fathers” of Western Metaphysics, Aristotle and Plato. All of them ascribe some sort of “being behind being” — i.e., none of them adhere to a strictly monist systems, mostly to solve the problem of universals — i.e., the fact that things-in-the-world seem to share characteristics. But where that “being behind being” is located in the metaphysical framework is vastly different for Plotinus, Descartes, and Heidegger. For Plotinus, roughly, being proceeds through the One (roughly equivalent to Plato’s “good”), for Descartes being as such proceeds out of God, and for Heidegger, being as such proceeds out of human existence. In this paper, I will explore these metaphysical theories in much further depth, and I will conclude by applying some of them to my personal philosophical project — roughly, “what does it mean to live digitally” —  at the service of the question: “what, precisely, _is_ a computer program?” 

Plotinus is often called the founder of neoplatonism, and for good reason. In his work, he inherits the Platonic metaphysical framework and applies that to an almost spiritual metaphysics grounded in deep personal introspection, which, hopefully, helps bring the soul into deep personal contact with what he calls “the One.” His metaphysics is grounded on three fundamental concepts: the One, the Intelligence, and the Soul.

To understand his metaphysics, it is important to first unpack the basic Platonic elements Plotinus builds upon. Plotinus, like Plato, separates being into ideas and particulars. Plato, of course, argued for a dualistic metaphysics that answers the fundamental metaphysical question: what makes something what it is by separating being in to two: idea and form. He does this to solve a fundamental metaphysical problem: how is it that I can come to say I know really anything at all about an object in the universe? And, even more problematically, how can I compare multiple objects in the world on the basis of shared characteristics? Take a red chair, for instance: how is that I’m able to say that a chair is distinctly a chair when clearly there are many many objects in the world and the chair itself is constantly degrading and changing? And how am I able to call both it and an apple “red?”

Plato rejects the notion that there is something inherent in the particular object itself that makes it a chair, and suggest that there must be some kind of atemporal, intelligible, eternal, immaterial idea of “chair” that exists independently of minds or even objects themselves. Essentially, for Plato, a particular chair _is_ a chair by virtue of participating in the Idea of chair-ness — and without that Idea, of course, an object could not be what it is. For Plato, this is also why I might be able to say an object is “beautiful:” the concept of beauty lies in an immaterial realm that is shared amongst all beautiful things: all beautiful things thus participate in the idea of “the beautiful.” Furthermore, Plato introduces the idea of the ideal form of the Good — the form that grounds all the other forms and brings the forms into visibility but is itself inaccessible, like the sun enlightens objects in our world.  

Plotinus inherits this metaphysical framework: individual particulars, which come into being as themselves through sharing in forms, are, in turn, enlightened by the ultimate idea of the Good — and reframes it just a bit. 

For Plotinus, “it is by the One that all beings are beings” (73). His conception of the One, specifically as outlined in his ninth tractate in the sixth ennead on “The Good Or The One,” is roughly similar to Plato’s conception of the Good. It is not equivalent to being. Neither is it simply “all things, because then it would no longer be one” (76) — the One cannot have multiplicity (but it also cannot have unity, because that would suggest “not being multiple.”) It is “neither in motion nor at rest” (77). It does not contain any difference. It is without form. The One is simply the “first existent:” it “begets all things” (78). It’s somewhat similar to Aristotle’s conception of the “unmoved mover,” except that it has no sense of causation. 

The One is necessary to Plotinus’s metaphysics, because, according to Plotinus, without it — the Intelligence, which is explored mostly in tractate nine in his fifth ennead on “The Intelligence, The Ideas, and Being,” and is very roughly equivalent to Plato’s ideas — could not exist: “duality is implied if the Intelligence is both thinker and thought.. and if the Intelligence contemplate some object other than itself, then certainly there exists something superior to it, it is still only of secondary rank.” But the Intelligence is not quite so simply equatable with the Platonic Ideas: it is perhaps more precise to say that for Plotinus, the Intelligence _contains_ the Ideas: it is what gives them their very intellectuality. 

For Plotinus, the Intelligence must be “understood not as intelligence in potency or intelligence evolving, but as intelligence in actuality for all eternity…. It think beings and they are.” (50) But it is not like a “knower,” either: it is “the lawgiver — or better still — the law.” (51) In other words, the Intelligence sets up the conditions for us to “grasp” Being itself. It is how the One transcends into a multiplicity of many things, since the one cannot be thought of in terms such a “multiplicity” and even “unity.” No beings exist outside the Intelligence: but all of the individual beings inherit from the intelligence, similarly, as Plotinus notes, to the way a “genus contains all the species or the whole all the parts.” (52) 

Thus, for Plotinus, an Idea — “an intelligence or intellective essence” (52) is “different from The Intelligence but is itself an intelligence” (53.) They build up to form the Intelligence in totality, in the way I might think of many individual thoughts in my brain building up to my “mind.” And it is through the act of “being” that the Intelligence grants actuality to the Ideas — thus, Plotinus notes at the end of the eighth section of his tractate on The Intelligence,  even though our “way of thinking” separates the individual Ideas from the Intelligence and the intelligence from Being — they are actually the same — “The Intelligence… itself undivided, does not divide up either Being or beings” (53).

This framework is still missing the final piece to the Plotinian puzzle: that is understanding the nature individual “souls.” In tractate eight of his fourth ennead, entitled “The Descent of the Soul,” Plotinus makes a very similar move with regards to the individual soul as he made with regards to the Intelligence: just as the Intelligence contains within many intelligences (or ideas), the Soul contains within in many individual souls. 

In Plotinus’s perspective, at some point — due to some “eternal law of nature” — my soul entered my physical body, at least partially (though it always remains “united by its higher part to the intelligible realm” (69).) For Plotinus — inheriting Plato’s concept of the material worlds as imperfect — this descent puts the individual soul in a very tortured situation: for, he argues, it always strives to come in to contemplation with the One, but, from its position in the the bodily world, it is prevented from doing so directly. It is only through the mechanisms of the bodily sphere that our bodily souls can come into knowledge about the One; after all, our bodily souls cannot know anything about anything until our bodies come into direct contact with it — “indeed, we are aware of what the soul contemplates only if the content descends to the level of sensation… we do not know what happens in any part of the soul until it becomes present to the entire soul” (70).

But without a fall through the Intelligence and into the material, imperfect, sensible world, the One would merely remain “shut up in itself” (68) — no beings would exist; “reality would remain buried and shapeless” (68). The individuals particulars must separate from the intellectual world in order to gain the very property of Being as a multiplicity separate from the One. Likewise, our souls must descend in to our bodies in the material world in order to order to ascribe the property of multiplicity to the objects descend from the One. But our souls always remain in contact with the intelligible world; and even, suggests Plotinus, through careful contemplation, it is possible for the soul to regain its connection to the One.

For Plotinus, the One is the ultimate reality: but it itself cannot act, and thus cannot give reality or Being to anything, because doing so would disrupt the holistic, perfect, and complete nature of the One. Thus the Intelligence, an “image” of the One, turns towards the One and gives it intellective principles. Our individual souls, descended from the same intellective sphere of the cosmic Soul into our bodies, are thus tasked with understanding the nature of the One through encountering objects in the world and contemplating towards their true nature, which, ultimately, is the nature of the One itself. 

Descartes’ metaphysical framework is grounded on a project of doubt he inherits from Plotinus and the other neo-Platonists. How is, Descartes wonders, that we can say anything _is_? Is it through our bodies? What if there is some kind of deception at play? How would we know? At first, Descartes seems less concerned about what metaphysically being _is_ as he is about this concept of certainty; i.e. it’s a project of proving what is certain (and thus, presumably, most real) by questioning the entire foundation of his understanding and building a metaphysical system from this foundation of doubt. It starts with the assumption that it is at least possible that his body does not have direct access to the world as it truly is. 

In his first meditation he goes about a project of “attacking straightaway those principles which supported everything I once believed” (_Meditations_, 13) in an attempt to “cause whatever has been built upon them to crumble of its own accord.” It it possible, he asks, that I am dreaming: and if so, would there be any signs that could confirm that to be the case, concluding that “there are no definitives signs by which to distinguish being awake from being asleep” (_M_, 19).  Yet even if he were in a state of slumber, Descartes suggests, there would still be some things “could only have been produced in the likeness of true things, and that therefore at least these general things… are not imaginary things, but are true and exist.”  These things, for Descartes, include “corporeal nature in general, together with its extension; the shape of extended things; their quantity, that is their size and number; as well as the place where they exist; the time through which they endure, and the like.” 

This is actually very similar to the framework Aristotle laid out in Zeta through his process of dissecting objects in the worlds in terms of forms (roughly equivalent to Plato’s Ideas): deviating from Plato, Aristotle argues that every object in the world is actually a composite of both its form and its substance — in other words, the forms don’t exist as an abstraction: they are congealed within the beings themselves. At this point in the text, Descartes seems to suggest, roughly, that even if he were dreaming — or even, for instance, if an evil God were to try and deceive him, the forms themselves would still remain “certain and indubitable” (_M_, 20). “Composite things” — in other words, Aristotle’s congealed beings — “are doubtful… but the simplest and most general things” remain “certain.” One point of differentiation between Descartes and Aristotle is that it seems as if all those things —  “corporeal nature in general, together with its extension; the shape of extended things; their quantity, that is their size and number; as well as the place where they exist; the time through which they endure, and the like” (_M_, 20) — are for Descartes, at this point in the text, what is most real; while for Aristotle they are merely accidental i.e. they have less metaphysical force than substances, because they do not exist independently of a being (in fact, that’s exactly what Aristotle calls them: accidents.)

Having established that distinction, Descartes proceeds on his project of hyperbolic doubt in the second meditation, “Concerning the Nature of the Human Mind: That it is Better Known than the Body” to question what _else_ might be “certain.” One of those things, for Descartes, is _himself_. Still “supposing everything I see is false,” and he can “believe none of what my deceitful memory represents ever exists,” “what will then be true” (_M_, 24)? In other words, Descartes is still attempting to pick out what can be ascertained by starting out this project of hyperbolic doubt: to which he first suggests that maybe he could only suggest the “single fact that nothing is certain” (_M_, 25) Not terribly satisfied with this conclusion, finally arriving on the conclusion that “doubtless I exist” for the mere reason that he is able to “persuade myself of something” (_M_, 25). Even if there were some “deceiver” above all manically working to shield Descartes from perceiving things as they are, that deceiver would still be deceiving _Descartes._ In other words, in order for something to deceive, it must have an object: and that object necessarily must exist. Descartes expands on that to suggest that even if his body did not exist or was a fabrication of some kind, his thought still must exist in order for him to be deceived. Thus “what it means to be a human” is merely to “be a thing that thinks… that doubts, understands, affirms, denies, wills, refuses, and that also imagines and senses” (_M_, 31).

So Descartes knows he exists, but he’s still not sure what about his existence points to his existence as an _I._ What is it that allows him to identify his body as his? He uses the analogy of melting wax: what can he “distinctly grasp” about the wax? After all, the wax before he melts it is very different from the wax after he melts it. Making a similar move to the one he made while he was dreaming: suggesting that can really only know the wax as “flexible, extended, and mutable;” (_M_, 31) and it is through intellect alone that he arrives as this conclusion: “for whatever came under the senses of east, smell, sight, touch or hearing has now changed; and yet the wax remains” (_M_, 30). Nor is it through his imagination that he makes the wax as such, because, “I grasp that the wax is capable of innumerable changes of this sort, even though I am incapable of running through these innumerable changes by using my imagination” (_M, 31_). This means that, for Descartes, “I perceive it through the mind alone” (_M_, 31). All this to say, 

> bodies are not, properly speaking,  perceived by the senses or by the faculty of imagination but by the intellect alone, and that they are not perceived through their being touched, or seen, but only through their being understood, I manifestly know that nothing can be perceived more easily and more evidently than my own mind.  (_M_, 31)

The rest of the project is taking this foundation: that Descartes necessarily exists, that he exists as a mind distinct from his body, and that he grasps the world through his intellect, and building upon it towards a theory that rationally proves the existence of a God, and, eventually that material things are real. The arguments for the proof of God are interesting, but I’d argue that in terms of the history of metaphysics and this project in particular they’re less important than the proof that material things are real. The most important idea out of that discussion is that Descartes eventually destroys the possibility that a God could deceive him — for a God, who is all-powerful — would simply have no need to rely on trickery and deception (for Descartes, trickery involves some kind of lack; and, of course, God can’t have any lack.) Roughly, Descarte’s God does in many ways operate in a similar form to the One or the Good — it exists to place the idea of God in Descarte’s mind; a kind of “first existent.” 

In conclusion, roughly speaking, Descartes concludes that the mind is separate from the body, that the _I_ necessarily exists and is the means by which we can, in fact, get to certain knowledge of the world, because a God would have no need to deceive our perceptions of the world; nor could an evil demon be giving us false impressions, as God would have supplied us with the capacity to recognize such demons. Nor could we simply be dreaming — as even in dreams, our ideas remain connected to some external facet in the world. Thus, for Descartes, material things really do exist, because there would otherwise be no other source for our ideas of material things: “the only alternative is that it is in some substance different from me, containing either formally or eminently all the reality that is contained objectively in the ideas produced by that faculty” (_M_, 80).

On the other hand, Heidegger’s metaphysical project begins quite a bit differently than Descarte’s, by reopening the question: what even is metaphysics? He points to an outline of a traditional notion of being that rested itself upon the idea of presence: i.e. what Aristotle and Plato classified as a “being” was merely what was immediately present for the human to grasp: “it states what beings are being” a “statement about the beings;” it “always represents the beingness of beings;” “the essence of this presencing lies deeply concealed in the early names for Being.” In other words, metaphysics necessarily begins with the proposition: “there are beings” and proceeds to ask how those beings came to be. For Heidegger, the metaphysical project of prior thinkers unfolded from this “ungrounded ground;” of assuming presence was equivalent to being; and “the tree of philosophy grows out of the soil in which metaphysics is rooted.” (232) 

This makes the project of doing a metaphysical project rather difficult: in order to “think metaphysically” one must “at the same time think out the ground of metaphysics, i.e., in a matter that is no longer metaphysical” (232). In other words, asking questions about metaphysics also requires grounding a notion of metaphysics itself. For Heidegger, the way to go about that project is unpacking human thought and human existence itself: “the distinctive relation to the world in which we turn toward beings themselves is supported and guided by a freely chosen stance of human existence.” 

It might be thus loosely said that for Heidegger, human existence is really the primary metaphysical object/subject; and, indeed, Heidegger does argue that “the being that exists is the human being… the human being alone exists.” But he’s not distinctly referring to a nihilistic or monist system that places the human being as the only “real thing:” he’s not denying substance of external objects here. What he means, more precisely, is that it is the human being — the human consciousness — that is the thing that stands outside the “unconcealedness” of being, that grasps onto objects in the world and grounds them as what they are:

> The being that exists is the human being. The human being alone exists. Rocks are, but they don’t exist. Trees are, but they do not exist. Horses are, but they do not exist. Angeles are, but they do not exist. God is, but he does not exist. The proposition ‘the human being alone exists’ does not mean that the human being alone is a real being while all other beings are mere appearances or human representations. The proposition “the human being exists” means: the human being is that being whose Being is distinguished by an open standing that stands in the unconcealedness of Being, proceeding from Being, in Being. 

For Heidegger, what makes things being things is an emanation out of a “nothingness” and reveal themselves to our consciousness: “all consciousness,” for Heidegger, “presupposes existence;” “the question concerning existence… is always subservient to thought.” This concept of nothingness is fairly critical to Heidegger’s analysis: it is out of the nothingness that humans “create” being: “only in the nothing of the Dasein do beings as beings, as a whole, in accord with their most proper possibility — that is, in a finite way — come to themselves. Heidegger points to anxiety as the way that nothingness reveals itself to us: “anxiety makes manifest the nothing.” To be clear, Heidegger is not talking about every-day anxiety: for instance, my anxiety regarding timely completion of this paper, for that anxiety is really just a kind of fear — a fear _of_ something (in my case, receiving an inferior grade.) Rather, Heidegger is referring a general anxiety: anxiety which, for Heidegger, is anxiety in the face of the nothingness that being emanates out of. 

Heidgger’s metaphysical framework is not altogether different from the Platonic or Aristotelian concerns that originally split object and form: it does seem, for Heidegger especially, that there is a force grounding objects in the world as beings. There is something that reveals objects to ourselves: that works to “unconceal” things in the world as what they are. 

The difference between the Aristotelian and Platonic dualist framework for Heidegger, is to place that force — essentially relocate the Ideas — from outside and independent of human existence into human existence and history. This is not terribly different from Descartes’ move to begin with hyperbolic doubt that places the self as the center of metaphysical inquiry; though, of course, the implications are much different. For Heidegger, things are what they are through our cultural and historical relationship with them: humans _make_ being out of things in the world based on history, language, culture, and the like. Metaphysics is more a _history_ for Heidegger than a tool for metaphysical certainty; metaphysics is the history of the truth of being. 

In conclusion, Heidegger believes that that really are things in the world, but what makes them what they are — what grants them being —  is not their presencing themselves, but human existence. Heidegger believes there are forces in the world that human beings through the mechanism of human thought — could never fully articulate or understand, for our science is grounded on the idea of beings as present and available to us. Even that which we cannot get direct access to — the sun or the planet Pluto, for instance — becomes “real” to us through it’s forces revealing its presence to us. Thus metaphysics is stuck in this “ambivalent” problem of attempting to claim truth on things in the world while also admitting that there might be truth outside of that which humans are able to grasp. Thus, very loosely speaking, what is most real for Heidegger is human existence, which grants being onto things outside the world in relation to history and culture.

Perhaps another way to look at this question — what does it mean to be anything at all — is to focus it around on facet of every day live. The primary question I study in my work revolves, roughly, around the question: “what does it mean to live digitally.” In other words, most of my work involves taking philosophical theories such and interpreting them in a world where the primary epistemological building block seems to be no longer the atom but the _bit_. What is and isn’t digital, of course, is a tough question, one which I simply do not have space to cover in this short paper. So the reader will have to excuse me for making a giant leap and assuming the realm of the digital as the starting point to examine some of these metaphysical theories. After that leap, the first question fundamental question that comes to mind is this: what, precisely, _is_ a computer program? 

Computers operate by interpreting files called _executables_. Executables, roughly, speaking, a series of instructions that have been “compiled,” or translated from a high-level programming language, such a C, into a lower-level set of instructions, usually assembly. This is because programmers can’t easily write in assembly (itself which must get translated down to the transistor-level bits of off and on states; the “1’s and 0’s.”) There are several theories — paradigms, really — around how these upper-level languages structure themselves. By and large, the most popular paradigm is that of what is called object-oriented programming. Object-oriented programming suggests creating higher-level objects which you can then call on when you need them. It’s a method that helps with keeping code DRY: don’t repeat yourself. Once you have a class of a button, you no longer have to worry about all the messy details that all buttons as buttons share. 

For instance, I might define a _class_ called “button,”  I give that button many possible “properties,” such as color and size, and behaviors (perhaps instructions to do when a button is clicked.)  Once I have a _class_ of button, I can go to another part of my code and call upon the button class to _instantiate_ a new button: the syntax varies, of course, by language, but in pseudocode here’s what that looks like:

button = new buttonClass.button({color: red, size: large}) 
button.click(); # calling the click method on the button

It doesn’t take much squinting to see the connections to classical metaphysics at play here. Modern programming languages are fundamentally a rehashing of classical Platonic and Neoplatonic thought. The button class contains within it the Platonic _Idea_ of what it means to be a button, and the button as it appears on the screen can be many colors or sizes, but they are mere _properties_ of the button — the concept of “redness” does not exist within the button itself (the programming language itself usually has a class called “red,” which define “what it means to be red” that can then be applied to many different kinds of objects.) In many ways then — at least for most programmers — the processor, or perhaps the compiler (the thing that transforms high-level code into low-level executables) could be construed as “the One” or “the Good.” For most but the most enlightened programmers, coming to terms with how code actually works on the transistor-level is a daunting if not impossible task: the most studied have only “sort of an idea” at what a processor is really doing, but it’s extremely complex: billions of also quickly alternating between off and on states that form millions of logic gates that actually get the desired work done. The compiler is thus the thing that provides structure: it enlightens them into a sense of being that the computer can understand.

Does this mean that the structure of programming languages suggest something along the lines of “Plato was right?” Here I’m less sure. Yes, the similarities are striking. There are actually reasons for that: early computer science was heavily influenced by the analytic philosophers working around the same time. But there are some problems: the most notable, of course, being that Plato and Aristotle, at least according to Heidegger, don’t really have a terribly fleshed out or concrete idea of non-being; and the structures of true _and_ false are incredibly fundamental to computer science.

Heidegger suggests that the way in which we humans grant existence to things in the world is structured not by absolute “reality” but through the structures of our mind. In other words, our metaphysics mirrors the way our brains work. It would make sense, then, that perhaps deconstructing object-oriented programming as a paradigm for structuring the world won’t really get us any closer to a concrete sense of how things _really_ are. Such as project, for Heidegger, is nonsense, because it assumes access to the answer to that question, which is something Heidegger works very hard to ensure is suspect. 

Rather, it may just be that “the structure of programming languages” — and how we build other theories and structures in our world — is closer to a reflection of how our brains work, especially with regards to the kind of culture and society those minds find themselves in: in the case of computer science, a society with the concept of absolute true and false; a society with an atomistic, material, definitive grasp on the world. It’s intriguing to note that new theories of computing — such as quantum computing and modern artificial intelligence paradigms — actually reject a lot of fundamental computer science principles, up to and including the reliance on the concept of true and false (quantum bits can have many possible states.) That signals to me that the metaphysics of computer science really rely on a lot of the things Heidegger concerned himself with. For that reason, of all the metaphysicians we read this quarter, I feel compelled to agree with Heidegger the most, especially with regards to the question I proposed earlier: that is, “what, exactly  _is_ a computer program” —  computer programs, roughly, are what they are as a function of human existence itself. 

In this paper, I briefly outlined the essential metaphysical theories of Plotinus, Descartes, and Heidegger, specifically in regards to “what is most real:” for Plotinus, it seems to be that the One that is most real; for Descartes, material things as sensed through the mind are most real; and for Heidegger, human existence is what it most real (as it is human existence that grants existence to objects out of the “nothing.”) I concluded with a brief detour into the metaphysics of computers, where I noted that it seems that Heidegger provides us with the most tools for doing a metaphysics of computers: but, as philosophy is in many ways a conversation, many of the ideas that each of these thinkers bring forth are not much more than a reframing of both Platonic and Aristotelian ideas — and even ultramodern sciences like computer science owe a great deal of debt to these two foundational philosophers.