1. Why are you interested in pursuing graduate study within the MAAPS program? (Please explain your choice of this particular program rather than a traditional course-based program.)

I have always loved the academy and the resources and structure it provides: an individual pursuing a disciplined pursuit of expertise in a given field, surrounded by a community of literal masters. At the same time, that structure can often suffocate non-traditional students working across fields at the edges of traditional academia. 

Not me. In spite of my professed love for the academy, from the beginning of my academic career, I have viewed it less as a pathway to an end and r


ather as a tool I could manipulate into assisting my with whatever journey I was currently partaking in. My undergraduate degree consisted of credits from no less than 7 different schools with coursework completed in 13 different countries around the world (including international waters!) 

Thus, my academic career so far has been "innovative," to say the least. And, alongside my academic pursuits, I have always participated in building out a professional practice in parallel to the work I was doing in the classroom. 

When deciding whether or not to apply to graduate school, I grappled with questions of structure versus innovation, practice versus theory, etc. Would I be able to forge my own path, blending the resources available through the academy with the ability to focus on both theory and practice? Would I be able to leverage my own personal circumstances  -- the fact that I live in a foreign megapolis, Mexico City, Mexico, for instance, with my desire to continue advancing my personal pursuit of knowledge? With the MAAPS program, I think the answer is yes. 